Dynatrace integration tutorial (#216)
kyma-project/telemetry-manager: docs/user/integration/dynatrace/README.md

    ```bash
    export DYNATRACE_NS="{NAMESPACE}"
    ```
1. If you don't have created a Namespace yet, do it now:
    ```bash
    kubectl create namespace $DYNATRACE_NS
    ```

### Create access token

Before connecting Kyma and Dynatrace, we need to create Dynatrace access token first

1. Open the Dynatrace navigation menu and go to the `Manage` > `Access tokens`
1. Click `Generate new token`
1. Type the name you want to give to this token, set an axpiration date if you need
1. Select the following scopes: `Ingest metrics`, `Read metrics`, `Write metrics`, `Ingest OpenTelemetry traces`, `Look up a single trace`, `Access problem and event feed, metrics, and topology`
1. Click `Generate token`
1. Copy and save the generated token

### Create secret

1. Create a new secret containing your access token by calling the following command. Replace {API_TOKEN} with the previously created token:
    ```bash
    kubectl -n $DYNATRACE_NS create secret generic dynatrace-token --from-literal="apiToken=Api-Token {API_TOKEN}"
    ```

### Ingest Traces

#### Enable Collecting Istio Traces

> By default, the tracing feature of the Istio service mesh is disabled to avoid unnecessary resource usage for the case that no TracePipeline is defined. Create a Telemetry custom resource in the istio-system Namespace to enable emitting traces with the kyma-traces Istio extension provider:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the tracing feature of the Istio service mesh is disabled to save resources for the case that no TracePipeline is defined.  To enable emitting traces with the kyma-traces Istio extension provider, create a Telemetry custom resource in the `istio-system` Namespace:
```

```bash
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: telemetry.istio.io/v1alpha1
kind: Telemetry
metadata:
  name: tracing-default
  namespace: istio-system
spec:
  tracing:
  - providers:
    - name: "kyma-traces"
    randomSamplingPercentage: 1.0
EOF
```

This configuration samples 1% of all requests. Adjust the randomSamplingPercentage property if you want to use a different sampling rate.

#### Create Kyma TracePipeline

> 1. Replace {ENVIRONMENT_ID} with the environment Id of your Dynatrace instance:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Replace the {ENVIRONMENT_ID} placeholder with the environment Id of your Dynatrace instance:
```

    ```bash
    cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
    apiVersion: telemetry.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1
    kind: TracePipeline
    metadata:
        name: dynatrace
    spec:
        output:
            otlp:
            endpoint:
                value: https://apm.cf.eu12.hana.ondemand.com/e/{ENVIRONMENT_ID}/api/v2/otlp
            headers:
                - name: Authorization
                valueFrom:
                    secretKeyRef:
                    name: dynatrace-token
                    namespace: ${DYNATRACE_NS}
                    key: apiToken
            protocol: http
    EOF
    ```

> 1. To find traces from your Kyma cluster in the Dynatrace UI, go to `Applications & Microservices` > `Distributed traces`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. To find traces from your Kyma cluster in the Dynatrace UI, go to **Applications & Microservices** > **Distributed traces**.
```

### Ingest Metrics

#### Create Kyma MetricPipeline

> 1. Replace {ENVIRONMENT_ID} with the environment Id of your Dynatrace instance:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Replace the {ENVIRONMENT_ID} placeholder with the environment Id of your Dynatrace instance:
```

    ```bash
    cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
    apiVersion: telemetry.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1
    kind: MetricPipeline
    metadata:
        name: dynatrace
    spec:
        output:
            otlp:
            endpoint:
                value: https://apm.cf.eu12.hana.ondemand.com/e/{ENVIRONMENT_ID}/api/v2/otlp
            headers:
                - name: Authorization
                valueFrom:
                    secretKeyRef:
                    name: dynatrace-token
                    namespace: ${DYNATRACE_NS}
                    key: apiToken
            protocol: http
    EOF
    ```

## Verifying the results by deploying sample apps

### Preparation

> 1. Export your Namespace as a variable. Replace `{NAMESPACE}` placeholder in the following command and run it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Export your Namespace as a variable. Replace the `{NAMESPACE}` placeholder in the following command and run it:
```

    ```bash
    export KYMA_NS="{NAMESPACE}"
    ```
1. If you don't have created a Namespace yet, do it now:
    ```bash
    kubectl create namespace $KYMA_NS
    ```
1. Update your Helm installation with the required Helm repository:
    ```bash
    helm repo add open-telemetry https://open-telemetry.github.io/opentelemetry-helm-charts
    helm repo update
    ```

> ### Installation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Install the Helm chart
```

> Run the Helm upgrade command, which installs the chart if not present yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Run the Helm upgrade command, which installs the chart if not present yet.
```

```bash
helm upgrade --version 0.22.2 --install --create-namespace -n $KYMA_NS otel open-telemetry/opentelemetry-demo -f ./sample-app/values.yaml

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ```
```

Port-forward your app to access the frontend:
```bash
kubectl -n $KYMA_NS port-forward svc/otel-frontend 8080

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ```
```

# Integrate Kyma with Dynatrace

## Overview 

> The Kyma Telemetry module supports you in integrating with observability backends in a convenient way. The following example outlines how to integrate with [Dynatrace](https://www.dynatrace.com) as a backend. With Dynatrace, you can get all your monitoring and tracing data into one observability backend to achieve real Application Performance Management with monitoring data in context.

Author: We have dynatrace operator, and we want to push the custom things

## Prerequisistes 

- Kyma as the target deployment environment
- Dynatrace account with permissions to create new access tokens

> - Helm 3.x if you want to deploy open-telemetry sample application

Author: deploy dynatrace-operator

## Installation

### Preparation

1. Export your Namespace you want to use for Dynatrace as a variable. Replace the `{NAMESPACE}` placeholder in the following command and run it:

    ```bash
    export DYNATRACE_NS="{NAMESPACE}"
    ```
1. If you haven't created a Namespace yet, do it now:
    ```bash
    kubectl create namespace $DYNATRACE_NS
    ```

### Create access token

Before connecting Kyma and Dynatrace, create a Dynatrace access token:

1. In the Dynatrace navigation, go to the **Manage** > **Access tokens** > **Generate new token**.
1. Type the name you want to give to this token. If needed, set an expiration date.
1. Select the following scopes:

>    - **Ingest metrics**

Reviewer 2: I assume **Ingest metrics** and **Ingest OTEL traces** is all you need, have you verified if the others are really needed, especially **Read metrics** sound strange

                              namespace: ${DYNATRACE_NS}
                              key: apiToken
                protocol: http
    EOF
    ```
1. To find traces from your Kyma cluster in the Dynatrace UI, go to **Applications & Microservices** > **Distributed traces**.

### Ingest Metrics

#### Create Kyma MetricPipeline

1. Replace the `{ENVIRONMENT_ID}` placeholder with the environment Id of your Dynatrace instance:
    ```bash
    cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
    apiVersion: telemetry.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1
    kind: MetricPipeline
    metadata:
        name: dynatrace
    spec:
        output:
            convertToDelta: true
            otlp:
                endpoint:
                    value: https://apm.cf.eu12.hana.ondemand.com/e/{ENVIRONMENT_ID}/api/v2/otlp
                headers:
                    - name: Authorization
                      valueFrom:
                          secretKeyRef:
                              name: dynatrace-token
                              namespace: ${DYNATRACE_NS}
                              key: apiToken
                protocol: http
    EOF
    ```

## Verify the results by deploying sample apps

> 

Reviewer 2: It should be enough to reference the existing tutorial for that, isn't it?

What is with the dynatrace operator, don't we need to install it as well?

How to rverify metrics are arriving? You describe it for traces but not for metrics

  namespace: istio-system
spec:
  tracing:
  - providers:
    - name: "kyma-traces"
    randomSamplingPercentage: 1.0
EOF
```

This configuration samples 1% of all requests. if you want to change the sampling rate, adjust the **randomSamplingPercentage** property.

#### Create Kyma TracePipeline

1. Replace the `{ENVIRONMENT_ID}` placeholder with the environment Id of your Dynatrace instance:
    ```bash
    cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
    apiVersion: telemetry.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1
    kind: TracePipeline
    metadata:
        name: dynatrace
    spec:
        output:
            otlp:
                endpoint:
                    value: https://apm.cf.eu12.hana.ondemand.com/e/{ENVIRONMENT_ID}/api/v2/otlp
                headers:
                    - name: Authorization
                      valueFrom:
                          secretKeyRef:
                              name: dynatrace-token
                              namespace: ${DYNATRACE_NS}
                              key: apiToken
                protocol: http
    EOF
    ```
1. To find traces from your Kyma cluster in the Dynatrace UI, go to **Applications & Microservices** > **Distributed traces**.

> ### Ingest Metrics

Reviewer 3: Maybe we can add here a comment that configurable metrics are still in development. That would allow us to publish the document already for tracing.

# Integrate Kyma with Dynatrace

## Overview 

The Kyma Telemetry module supports you in integrating with observability backends in a convenient way. The following example outlines how to integrate with [Dynatrace](https://www.dynatrace.com) as a backend. With Dynatrace, you can get all your monitoring and tracing data into one observability backend to achieve real Application Performance Management with monitoring data in context. Apart from [installing Dynatrace Operator](https://github.com/Dynatrace/dynatrace-operator) and leveraging all of the benefits of Dynatrace, you can also integrate custom metrics and traces with Dynatrace. 

> This tutorial covers only operations with traces and metrics, but not with logs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This tutorial covers only trace and metric ingestion. Log ingestion is not covered..
```

#### Create Kyma TracePipeline

1. Replace the `{ENVIRONMENT_ID}` placeholder with the environment Id of your Dynatrace instance:
    ```bash
    cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
    apiVersion: telemetry.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1
    kind: TracePipeline
    metadata:
        name: dynatrace
    spec:
        output:
            otlp:
                endpoint:
                    value: https://{ENVIRONMENT_ID}.live.dynatrace.com/api/v2/otlp
                headers:
                    - name: Authorization
                      valueFrom:
                          secretKeyRef:
                              name: dynatrace-token
                              namespace: ${DYNATRACE_NS}
                              key: apiToken
                protocol: http
    EOF
    ```

    If you manage Dynatrace yourself, the link to the Dynatrace API endpoint is `https://{YOUR_DOMAIN}/e/{ENVIRONMENT_ID}/api/v2/otlp`
1. To find traces from your Kyma cluster in the Dynatrace UI, go to **Applications & Microservices** > **Distributed traces**.

### Ingest Metrics

> > **Note:** `MetricPipeline` feature is not available yet. To understand the current progress, watch this [epic](https://github.com/kyma-project/kyma/issues/13079).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> **Note:** The `MetricPipeline` feature is still under development not active in Kyma releases yet. To understand the current progress, watch this [epic](https://github.com/kyma-project/kyma/issues/13079).
```

Reviewer: Much better!  Maybe even shorter:

```suggestion
> **NOTE:** The `MetricPipeline` feature is still under development. To understand the current progress, watch this [epic](https://github.com/kyma-project/kyma/issues/13079).
```

## Overview 

> The Kyma Telemetry module supports you in integrating with observability backends in a convenient way. The following example outlines how to integrate with [Dynatrace](https://www.dynatrace.com) as a backend. With Dynatrace, you can get all your monitoring and tracing data into one observability backend to achieve real Application Performance Management with monitoring data in context. Apart from [installing dynatrace operator](https://github.com/Dynatrace/dynatrace-operator) and leveraging all of the benefits of Dynatrace, you can also integrate custom metrics and traces with Dynatrace which is described in this tutorial.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Kyma Telemetry module supports you in integrating with observability backends in a convenient way. The following example outlines how to integrate with [Dynatrace](https://www.dynatrace.com) as a backend. With Dynatrace, you can get all your monitoring and tracing data into one observability backend to achieve real Application Performance Management with monitoring data in context. Apart from [installing Dynatrace Operator](https://github.com/Dynatrace/dynatrace-operator) and leveraging all of the benefits of Dynatrace, you can also integrate custom metrics and traces with Dynatrace.
```

## Prerequisistes 

- Kyma as the target deployment environment
- Dynatrace account with permissions to create new access tokens
- Helm 3.x if you want to deploy open-telemetry sample application

> - Deploy [dynatrace operator](https://github.com/Dynatrace/dynatrace-operator) (Recommended)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Deploy [Dynatrace Operator](https://github.com/Dynatrace/dynatrace-operator) (Recommended)
```

2. To access your application, port-forward it to the frontend:
   ```bash
   kubectl -n $KYMA_NS port-forward svc/otel-frontendproxy 8080

### Access metrics and traces

> 1. To access metrics you should open your **Dynatrace Manager** and go to the **Observe and explore** > **Metrics**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. To access metrics, open your **Dynatrace Manager** and go to **Observe and explore** > **Metrics**.
```

> 1. To access traces  you should open your **Dynatrace Manager** and go to the **Applications & Microservices** > **Distributed traces**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. To access traces, open your **Dynatrace Manager** and go to **Applications & Microservices** > **Distributed traces**.
```
